Exposing data from guest agent (#380)
openshift/openshift-origin-design: designs/virtualization/4.x/expose-guest-data/expose guest data.md

# Expose Guest Agent Data

When the Guest Agent is installed on a VM some additional valuable data can be collected then surfaced in the UI.
When the Guest Agent isn’t installed we will inform the users about that.

> We can report that in the VM’s Overview tab under the Status card and provide a message: “This virtual machine does not have a Guest Agent installed. Some metrics, and management features will not be available or accurate” and add an external link to view the details about the installation procedure of the Guest Agent, if the users are interested to do so. The link will lead the users to the instructions on how to install the Guest Agent. Linux users will need to download and install the Guest Agent online, while Windows users will get the installation on a CD ROM.

Reviewer: accurate should be inaccurate :)

Reviewer 2: Do we have an example of something that might not be accurate? It seems a little odd to show information that we know ahead of time could be misleading or incorrect... should we even bother showing those things at all?

Reviewer 3: @andybraren Hi,

> Do we have an example of something that might not be accurate? 

For example the "Operating System" we show in overview and inventory:
   a - without GA - a label user created to indicate what OS they intend to install on the VM.
   b - with GA - the actual OS installed.
In this case we may show wrong information e.g. "windows" without GA because admin intended to install windows, but "RHEL 8" with GA because this is the OS that was actually installed, or partial information, e.g. "fedora" without GA and "Fedora 30 (Cloud Edition)" with GA.

Reviewer 3: > should we even bother showing those things at all?

Sometimes :-) , in the OS example ( https://github.com/openshift/openshift-origin-design/pull/380#discussion_r404545463 ) the two parts of the information may be important:
a - If actual OS installed is different than the one the admin intended, it's important to know about it, it may indicate a problem.
b - if actual  OS installed is the same as intended, than original data may be redundant, because with GA we will get the same data but with more information.

Reviewer: ya I agree, if they've chosen Windows in the install flow (for example) and don't have the GA installed it makes sense to show them what we can which would be what they chose. Ideally they install the GA and we can provide the most accurate info but in most cases I'd bet the one they choose will be accurate anyway.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, thank you for the example @yaacov!

> After the installation they will need to restart the VM.

Reviewer: Should the text in the status state that they need to restart?

Author: +1

Reviewer 3: `Linux users will need to download and install the Guest Agent online, while Windows users will get the installation on a CD ROM.`

This is inaccurate, linux and windows users will need to install the GA using the instructions in the link, we do not know if linus users will need to use the software manager to install the GA or not, and we do not know if windows users will have the a CD with the installer.

`After the installation they will need to restart the VM`

we do not know that either.

My 2c are just tell people to use the instructions in the link ...

Author: Thanks @yaacov

> ![Notifying users that Guest Agent isn't installed](img/vm-overview-tab.png)

Reviewer 2: nit: the "Learn more" link is a little low here. Also, where should that link point to?

Author: Thanks, @andybraren, I think the location of the link is correct now. 
The link will point the users to the instructions on how to install the GA. Since there could be many scenarios of what the users should do to install the GA (f.e. it depends on what OS they have), we point them to the instructions. If we had known what they have and need to do, we could have done it from our side.
Linux users will need to download and install the GA online, while Windows users will get the installation on a CD ROM.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the update! Sounds good, marking as resolved.

## After installing the Guest Agent

Some of the data that is collected via the Guest Agent can be surfaced in the VM’s Overview tab under the Details card, as well as on the Details tab:

- Hostname
- Guest Agent OS version - the actual OS version that is installed on the VM
- Time zone
- Users list - active users that are currently logged in to the VM

### VM’s Overview tab > Details card

> ![Additional data when Guest Agent is installed](img/vm-dashboard-w-ga-installed.png)

Author: @andybraren Did you mean to show the warning message in the Status card?

> ![Additional data when Guest Agent is installed](img/vm-dashboard-w-ga-installed.png)

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I meant that no warning message is needed at all in the Status card in my opinion. No inline warning alert or message. Just that the VM is "Running" and that's all. The Details card mentions that 2 users are logged in, which seems like the right place for that info.

I do think that an inline warning alert may make sense in the "Power off" or "Restart" modals though. Powering off the VM might cause the 2 logged-in users to lose what they are working on, so warning the user before they do those actions could be helpful.

> ![Additional data when Guest Agent is installed](img/vm-dashboard-w-ga-installed.png)

Reviewer: oh ya I missed this the first time around. I agree that we don't need an alert for the status but do think some kind of warning for when there are users logged in.

> ![Additional data when Guest Agent is installed](img/vm-dashboard-w-ga-installed.png)

Author: +1 thanks @andybraren

> ![Additional data when Guest Agent is installed](img/vm-dashboard-w-ga-installed.png)

Reviewer: It would be a nice addition to add the design for that modal too, we can clarify the text and ensure it doesn't get missed on implementation.

Clicking the number of logged in users will lead to a table with all the relevant info about these logged in users.

### Details tab

![VM overview page](img/vm-overview.png)

> To simplify the information about OS versions (the Guest Agent and what was installed by the admin while creating the VM), we can surface only the current OS version that’s installed (the Guest Agent OS). In case we have a mismatch with the OS that the admin originally installed, we can show an alert that indicates that mismatch and offer a solution.

Author: @andybraren it should be included in this design.

> ![notification when mismatch os version between Guest Agent and original](img/vm-overview-GA-not-match.png)

Reviewer: so in this scenario the user chose a different OS in the install wizard than what the GA is finding? The alert assumes they want Windows and not what they chose in the install. Could we just alert them that the chosen OS and the detected OS are different?

## Disks

### File system type info will be surfaced under the VM’s Disks tab in cases the Guest Agent is installed

Some additional data related to File systems can be surfaced in the VM’s Disks tab:

- File system type/Disk mapping

- Disk mounts with usage - mount point - where the disk is mounted in the tree

![disks table](img/disks-table.png)

Clicking on the disk name will open a popover with an explanation about the 2 different views of the disks: the K8s view and the Guest Agent view.

> ![disks table with popover](img/disks-2-tables-popover.png)

Reviewer: is this popover coming from the name of the disk or the (i) icon above the table? I think we could even consider a sub title below "Disks" and "File systems" that explains the different between the two tables and drop the title popovers entirely.
In the case just the disk table is available (because the GA isn't installed) maybe we can show that the GA can be installed to provide the File system info. WDYT?

Author: @matthewcarleton The popover should come from the (i) icon above the table, but I agree we can add subtitles below the headlines to explain the difference between the 2 tables.
I'm afraid that in case the GA isn't installed and we say it can be installed, then we need to provide a link or some solution to get that GA and then it makes it a bit cumbersome.

Reviewer: that's true, you could explore that. You could also just add a link to the subtitle as well. Not sure which will look best though.

Author: @matthewcarleton TMHO the option of adding the link beside the subtitle works better because it doesn't clutter the UI as in the option of adding it to a notification or alert format.

Since there is no 1:1 mapping between the way the disks are seen from the OpenShift Virtualization point of view and the way they are seen from the Guest Agent point of view, we’ll show the 2 sets of info in 2 separate tables.
The 'Disks' table will always be shown and the ‘File systems’ table (partitions) will be shown only if the Guest Agent is installed.

> ![2 tables: disks and file systems](img/disks-2-tables.png)

Reviewer: I'm guessing the names of the disks are user generated right?  If that's the case maybe we should update the design so it doesn't look like they are system generated. Just a nit :)

Reviewer 3: > maybe we should update the design so it doesn't look like they are system generated

:-) , example of names "boot", "data", "home" ...

a. we do not have the "file system" and "mount" in the disks table ...
b. "used bytes" show percents ... ( p.s we can show both bytes and percent ... ? )

> ![2 tables: disks and file systems](img/disks-2-tables.png)

Reviewer 3: This table will show the data from the GA, It's called "guest os filesystem information" [1] [2] and show the file systems used by the OS.

"Disk Partitions" sounds like "one or more regions on secondary storage, so that each region can be managed separately" [3] and my better discribe the "disks" table we currently show.

My vote is for "File systems"

[1] https://kubevirt.io/api-reference/master/definitions.html#_v1_virtualmachineinstanceguestagentinfo
[2] https://kubevirt.io/api-reference/master/definitions.html#_v1_virtualmachineinstancefilesystem
[3] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disk_partitioning

> ![2 tables: disks and file systems](img/disks-2-tables.png)

Author: @andybraren according to @yaacov the name of the 2nd table should be 'File systems"

> ![2 tables: disks and file systems](img/disks-2-tables.png)

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, in [this Google Doc conversation](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PBNBi2eJbcKzwHBRw9_OaQ8R9eVN5sZO3-v5Ukmy8Ok/edit?disco=AAAAGWCp_3E) with @jelkosz it sounded like "Partitions" might be what these are (which is a more familiar word to me, at least in a Windows context) but if "File systems" is more accurate we should go with that.

# Expose Guest Agent Data

When the Guest Agent is installed on a VM some additional valuable data can be collected then surfaced in the UI.
When the Guest Agent isn’t installed we will inform the users about that.

We can report that in the VM’s Overview tab under the Status card and provide a message: “This virtual machine does not have a Guest Agent installed. Some metrics, and management features will not be available or inaccurate” and add an external link to view the details about the installation procedure of the Guest Agent, if the users are interested to do so. The link will lead the users to the instructions on how to install the Guest Agent.

> ![Notifying users that Guest Agent isn't installed](img/vm-overview-tab.png)

Reviewer: same nit about the spacing for the learn more action here.

> We can report that in the VM’s Overview tab under the Status card and provide a message: “This virtual machine does not have a guest agent installed. Some metrics,and management features will not be available or accurate” and add an external link to view the details about the installation procedure of the Guest agent, if the users are interested to do so. The link will lead the users to the instructions on how to install the GA. Linux users will need to download and install the GA online, while Windows users will get the installation on a CD ROM.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We can report that in the VM’s Overview tab under the Status card and provide a message: “This virtual machine does not have a guest agent installed. Some metrics, and management features will not be available or accurate” and add an external link to view the details about the installation procedure of the Guest agent, if the users are interested to do so. The link will lead the users to the instructions on how to install the GA. Linux users will need to download and install the Guest Agent online, while Windows users will get the installation on a CD ROM.
```

![Notifying users that GA isn't installed](img/vm-overview-tab.png)

## After installing the Guest agent

Some of the data that is collected via the Guest agent can be surfaced in the VM’s Overview tab under the Details card, as well as on the Details tab:

- Hostname

> - Guest OS version - what is the actual OS version that is installed on the VM

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Guest OS version - the actual OS version that is installed on the VM
```

- Time zone
- Users list - active users that are currently logged in to the VM

> Host name, Guest OS version and time zone will be added to the details card in the Overview tab.

Reviewer 4: I think we can drop this line since you list the fields above

### VM’s Overview tab > Details card

![Additional data when GA is installed](img/vm-dashboard-w-ga-installed.png)

> Clicking the number of logged in users will lead to a table with all the relevant info about these logged in users.

Reviewer 4: Where does this table live? Is it a popover? Can we provide a design for this?

Author: @lizsurette The logged in users table lives at the bottom of the VM's details page.

Reviewer 4: @yfrimanm Ah yes, I see now :) Thanks!

![VM overview page](img/vm-overview.png)

> To simplify the information about OS versions (the Guest Agent and what was installed by the admin while creating the VM), we can surface only the current OS version that’s installed (the Guest Agent OS). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To simplify the information about OS versions (the Guest Agent and what was suggested by the admin while creating the VM), we can surface only the current OS version that’s installed (the Guest Agent OS). 
```

![VM overview page](img/vm-overview.png)

> To simplify the information about OS versions (the GA and what was installed by the admin while creating the VM), we can surface only the current OS version that’s installed (the GA one). In case we have a mismatch with the OS that the admin originally installed, we can show an alert that indicates that mismatch and offers a way to solution.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To simplify the information about OS versions (the Guest Agent and what was installed by the admin while creating the VM), we can surface only the current OS version that’s installed (the Guest Agent OS). In case we have a mismatch with the OS that the admin originally installed, we can show an alert that indicates that mismatch and offer a solution.
```

> In case we have a mismatch between the chosen Operating System version (the OS that the admin originally installed) and the detected Operating System version, we can show an alert that indicates that mismatch and offer a solution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In case we have a mismatch between the suggested Operating System version (the OS that the admin originally suggested) and the installed Operating System version, we can show an alert that indicates that mismatch.
```
a - admin can not install an operating system.
b - we can not offer a solution, because we do not know what and if there is any problem.

Author: @yaacov so that means we can't provide a link that will enable the user to solve that mismatch?

Reviewer 3: > we can't provide a link that will enable the user to solve that mismatch

I can't think of a way ...

For example, lets say an admins created a "fedora" machine ( e.g. added a label in the YAML saying they intend this machine to run fedora ) but the users need a RHEL or windows machine, so they ignore the admins suggestion and installed what they need, while taking care of all the configuration needed by themselves ... when looking at the data GA provides, we have no way to identify if everything works fine or not, and if not what is the problem.

Author: I guess we should omit that link then. @matthewcarleton does it make sense to just notify of a mismatch without providing any solution?

Reviewer: Since the GA differs depending on the OS I'm not sure the user would ever see an error like this. 
If an admin created this VM they would have either provided the GA for Fedora ( in this example) or not at all. 
If that's true then the question is can we flag that the wrong GA is installed for a VM @yaacov ?

Otherwise we'd just state the GA is not installed and needs to be. 
That should align with the earlier designs we did [here](http://openshift.github.io/openshift-origin-design/designs/virtualization/4.3/guest-agent-not-installed/)

Reviewer: a general question I have about GA for windows relates to this. Do we plan on implementing what we have for guest agent tools under the OS section [here](http://openshift.github.io/openshift-origin-design/designs/virtualization/4.3/create-vm/step-1-genaral/#operating-system-field)
If we plan to work on this it seems like a good time to do the rest of the GA related designs too :) @jelkosz WDYT?

Author: @yaacov Can you please explain what happens if the OS is changed but the initial GA stays as it was originally set. The wrong GA means we can’t detect the running OS. The question for that scenario is what does a GA report back if it can’t find any info?

> ![notification when mismatch os version between Guest Agent and original](img/vm-overview-GA-not-match.png)

Reviewer 3: In the image, the error message suggests we can identify a problem because of the missmatch ... but we can not.
My suggestion is to keep the warning text to what we do know, for example, "Operating System mismatch, identified X operating system installed on a virtual machine created for Y operating system."

Reviewer: I agree, we should be only notifying them that the chosen OS does not match what the VM is actually running. Maybe make it a bit more readable though:
`Operating system mismatch`
`This virtual machine is running Windows but was configured to run Linux when it was created. `
WDYT @yaacov ?

Reviewer 3: > WDYT @yaacov ?

@matthewcarleton sounds much better, thanks :+1:

Author: Thanks @yaacov & @matthewcarleton

![notification when mismatch os version between GA and original](img/vm-overview-GA-not-match.png)

## Disks

### File system type info will be surfaced under the VM’s Disks tab in cases the GA is installed

Some additional data related to File system can be surfaced in the VM’s Disks tab:

- File system type/Disk mapping

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

- Disk mounts with usage - mount point - where the disk is mounted in the tree

![disks table](img/disks-table.png)

> Clicking on the disk name will open a popover with an explanation about the 2 different views of the disks: the K8s view and the GA view.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Clicking on the disk name will open a popover with an explanation about the 2 different views of the disks: the Kubernetes view and the Guest Agent view.
```

Reviewer 4: Should this be "OpenShift Virtualization" rather than "Kubernetes"? The actual popover shows kubevirt so I'm not sure :)

> ![disks table](img/disks-2-tables-popover.png)

Reviewer 4: Should there be an info icon next to the "Disks" table header to show this popover?

> ![disks table](img/disks-2-tables-popover.png)

Reviewer 4: I would spell out Guest Agent in the popover. GA can mean lots of things :)

> ![disks table](img/disks-2-tables-popover.png)

Reviewer 4: We should remove the "please" from the popover text...I think I remember that in our content strategy we should avoid using it.

> Since there is no 1:1 mapping between the way the disks are seen from the kubevirt point of view and the way they are seen from the guest agent point of view, we’ll show the 2 sets of info in 2 separate tables.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since there is no 1:1 mapping between the way the disks are seen from the OpenShift Virtualization point of view and the way they are seen from the guest agent point of view, we’ll show the 2 sets of info in 2 separate tables.
```

> The disks table will be be shown constantly and the ‘File systems’ table (partitions) will be shown only if the GA is installed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The 'Disks' table will always be shown and the ‘File systems’ table (partitions) will be shown only if the Guest Agent is installed.
```

> ![disks table](img/disks-2-tables-GA-not-installed.png)

Reviewer: trying to shorten/make this more succinct. 
`The following disk info is provided via OpenShift Virtualization. To expose more information about the internal file system install the guest agent. Learn more`

Reviewer 2: The approved capitalization and phrasing of "OpenShift Virtualization" is still a little unclear to me, but I think this would be a lowercase "v". 🤷‍♂️ [See here](https://mojo.redhat.com/docs/DOC-1216821)

> ![disks table](img/disks-2-tables-GA-not-installed.png)

Reviewer: just a nit: That button has some odd spacing on the left side. It can just be inline with the text. :)

Author: @matthewcarleton Which button? I think the "Add disk" button is inline with the text, isn't it?

Reviewer: ah no sorry I mean the Learn more action under the disks title

![Notifying users that Guest Agent isn't installed](img/vm-overview-tab.png)

## After installing the Guest Agent

Some of the data that is collected via the Guest Agent can be surfaced in the VM’s Overview tab under the Details card, as well as on the Details tab:

- Hostname
- Guest Agent OS version - the actual OS version that is installed on the VM
- Time zone
- Users list - active users that are currently logged in to the VM

### VM’s Overview tab > Details card

![Additional data when Guest Agent is installed](img/vm-dashboard-w-ga-installed.png)

Clicking the number of logged in users will lead to a table with all the relevant information about these logged in users.

### Details tab

![VM overview page](img/vm-overview.png)

This information is required so that users will be aware when they're about to take an action that will affect those logged in users (f.e.) powering the VM off or restarting it. In case a user decides to power off a vm when there is/are active user/s logged into it, they will be notified about that.  

> ![Notifying that there are logged in users to that vm](img/power-off-modal.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Notifying that there are logged in users to that vm](img/Power-off-modal.png)
```

![notification when mismatch os version between Guest Agent and original](img/vm-overview-GA-not-match.png)

## Disks

### File system type info will be surfaced under the VM’s Disks tab in cases the Guest Agent is installed

Some additional data related to File systems can be surfaced in the VM’s Disks tab:

- File system type/Disk mapping

- Disk mounts with usage - mount point - where the disk is mounted in the tree

Since there is no 1:1 mapping between the way the disks are seen from the OpenShift virtualization point of view and the way they are seen from the Guest Agent point of view, we’ll show the 2 sets of information in 2 separate tables.
The 'Disks' table will always be shown and the ‘File systems’ table (partitions) will be shown only if the Guest Agent is installed.

In the case the Guest Agent isn't installed and we can provide only the disk table, we will suggest that the Guest Agent can be installed to provide the File system information.

#### Disks table (when Guest Agent isn't installed)

> ![disks table](img/disks-2-tables-GA-not-installed.png)

Reviewer: Should this say "OpenShift virtualization operator"?

Author: +1
